The President:
Over the last month, I've
been traveling the country,
talking to Americans about
how we can out-educate,
out-innovate, and out-build
the rest of the world.
Doing that will require a
government that lives within its
means, and cuts whatever spending
we can afford to do without.
But it'll also require investing
in our nation's future --
training and
educating our workers;
increasing our commitment
to research and technology;
building new roads and bridges,
high-speed rail and high-speed Internet.
In cities and towns
throughout America,
I've seen the benefits
of these investments.
The schools and colleges of
Oregon are providing Intel --
the state's largest
private employer --
with a steady stream of
highly-educated workers and engineers.
At Parkville Middle School
outside of Baltimore,
engineering is the
most popular subject,
thanks to outstanding teachers
who are inspiring students to
focus on their math
and science skills.
In Wisconsin, a company called
Orion is putting hundreds of
people to work manufacturing
energy-efficient lights in a
once-shuttered plant.
And in the small
community of Marquette,
in Michigan's Upper Peninsula,
widely accessible high-speed
Internet has allowed students
and entrepreneurs to connect to
the global economy.
In fact, one small
business, a third-generation,
family-owned clothing shop
called Getz's is now selling
their products online, which
has helped them to double their
workforce and make them one of
America's 5,000 fastest-growing
companies in a recent listing.
Each of these places reminds us
that investments in education,
innovation, and infrastructure
are an essential down payment on
our future.
But they also remind us that the
only way we can afford these
investments is by getting
our fiscal house in order.
Just like any family, we have to
live within our means to make
room for things we
absolutely need.
That's why I've called for
a freeze on annual domestic
spending over the
next five years --
a freeze that would cut
the deficit by more than
$400 billion over
the next decade,
bringing this kind of spending
to its lowest share of our
economy since Dwight
Eisenhower was President.
Just to be clear, that's lower
than it was under the past three
administrations, and lower than
it was under Ronald Reagan.
Now, putting this budget freeze in
place will require tough choices.
That's why I've frozen salaries
for hardworking civil servants
for three years, and proposed
cutting programs I care deeply
about, like community action
programs in low-income neighborhoods.
I'm not taking these
steps lightly --
but I'm taking them because our
economic future demands it.
Still, a freeze in annual
domestic spending is just a start.
If we're serious about tackling
our long-run fiscal challenges,
we also need to cut excessive
spending wherever we find it --
in defense spending, spending
in Medicare and Medicaid,
and spending through tax
breaks and loopholes.
I am willing to consider any
serious ideas to help us reduce
the deficit -- no matter
what party is proposing them.
But instead of cutting the
investments in education and
innovation we need to
out-compete the rest of the
world, we need a balanced
approach to deficit reduction.
We all need to be
willing to sacrifice,
but we can't
sacrifice our future.
Next week, Congress will
focus on a short-term budget.
For the sake of our
people and our economy,
we cannot allow
gridlock to prevail.
Both Democratic and Republican
leaders in the House and Senate
have said they believe it's
important to keep the government
running while we work together
on a plan to reduce our
long-term deficit.
Given that, I urge and expect
them to find common ground so we
can accelerate, and not
impede, economic growth.
It won't be easy.
There will be plenty of
debates and disagreements,
and neither party will
get everything it wants.
Both sides will
have to compromise.
That's what it'll take to do
what's right for our country.
And I look forward to working
with members of both parties to
produce a responsible budget
that cuts what we can't afford,
sharpens America's competitive
edge in the world,
and helps us win the future.
Thanks everybody, and
have a great weekend.